This is how you can embed the worst nuclear disaster in history. This is the
new safe confinement construction, at reactor 4 in Chernobyl.
In 1986 the nuclear power plant exploded here - and that's a phrase you never
want to hear. The area has been cleared, and it will be uninhabitable here for millennia:
to get here you need special permission, although it has become easy in the latter
years.
In the months after the disaster, there is a concrete sarcophagus - called the shelter object
- to built the damaged reactor. It is built quickly and desperately. The
building has claimed many lives, and a megaton of concrete and metal has been used. It has worked, but will not
stand for always, in addition it is built on the unstable remains of the old reactor.
But there is a replacement, which is still being built on. The new safe confinement construction,
that has cost more than one and a half billion US dollars. It is huge, a metal arch
a hundred meters high. When it is finished, it becomes enormous tracks with steel cables
moved over the reactor in a week. If the arch is there, the sides will be filled,
and the reactor is again protected, ready to be safely dismantled. This is
the world's largest movable object - although it will only have to move once.
It has some pretty amazing design requirements. Nothing can leak out.
And all weather conditions that could possibly occur in Ukraine can handle a hundred
year.
Think about that. One and a half billion dollars for something that
a hundred years. That's great - if we have the money in those hundred years,
find the time and technology to safely get rid of all the radioactive material here.
Is that going to work? Or, if there is no immediate threat of threats and disasters, we will move it
by for future generations to worry about.
In one hundred years, when the arch is at the end of its life, we dismantle
him then and we celebrate that it succeeded? Or we spend so much money when building a replacement.